<!-- 
.. title: Empowering Victims
.. slug: empowering-victims
.. date: 2014/03/14 20:16:04
.. tags: draft
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
-->

In the early 70's, Steve Paxton's embarked on an series of experiments with
physicality that he said was missing from dance at the time. He was inspired in
particular by the martial arts. Steve submitted a grant proposal to the NEA, who
proceeded to fund these experiments -- initially a small group of athletic men
literally throwing themselves at each other to see what could happen. If you
manage to see some footage of these first experiments, it looks pretty nuts, and
it was - the first participants couldn't keep up this level of intensity, and
they toned things down rapidly after the first couple of weeks! [This
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9FeSDsmIeHA#t=2m42s) shows some of the
preparation for their first performance. You can see there that women had
already been included, and -- while it may be much harder to see -- there's a
clear focus on safety. At this point, the foundations of Contact Improv had been
clearly established.

From those initial experiments, Contact Improv has become a true folk art, and
it's now under continuing development (somewhat anarchically) by the community
that practices it.  There is no appreciable culture of critics, and no real
audience to speak of (though some claim it is the “largest” influence on where
contemporary dance has gone in recent times). One particular point of contention
is embodied by Steve Paxton's assertion that “If you're dancing physics, you're
dancing contact. if you're dancing chemistry, you're doing something else.” But
this debate is an aspirational one at best -- any interaction between two human
bodies will involve both physics and the emotional stuff that comes up.

So, it's not surprising that my initial experience of Contact *was* pretty much
"dancing physics" -- I *get* this attitude, and I think it's a great place to
focus on developing the skills you need to stay safe and have fun. I had come
from a longish history of practicing things like juggling and acro-balance. And
I *like* physics. But I've been dancing long enough to come to know folks for
whom Contact Improv (or any dance) is profoundly emotional or even "sexual" in
some sense. This view is well-represented in the community, and the variety of
attitudes is generally not a problem -- in the end, the reality of two or more
people dancing simply is what it is. But no matter what you think Contact Improv
is "about," it's easy to see that there are issues surrounding both physical and
emotional safety in the context of the dance -- particularly when you're dancing
with people you don't know very well.

I was one of the organizers of Camp Contact in 2010, and I had conversations
with my friends who ran successful jams to get tips on how to help make it a
great experience for everyone involved. I got a surprising bit of advice from a
friend who runs the Open Movement Jam in New York -- he gave me tips on how to
identify sexual predators and suggested I interrupt certain kinds of movement
interactions.  He was not simply imagining things -- he told me how he'd
recently had to ask one attendee of the jam to leave, and that later this man
did commit an act of sexual abuse at another dance event in the city.

There was an act of sexual abuse at the very first Jam at Camp Contact.

Some time later, a couple was visiting me from Naropa University. I was
experiencing a great connection in particular with one of them about social
structures that support meditation and positive action. Her partner and I are
huge Contact Improv enthusiasts, and we both really wanted her to be able to
share in our experience. She was resistant, however, because of an experience
she'd had previously with sexual predation in a similar dance setting. But, we
convinced her to join us. And, to my shock and subsequent outrage, it happened
to her again.

My friend Nick captured it precisely by guessing at my feelings at the
time: I “wanted to rip somebody's balls off.”

